
# Clubhead Geometry in Pictures (Irons and Wedges)
While there is no substitute for precision gauges and instruments to measure clubheads accurately and quickly, the powers of observation can go a long way into understanding what the club head designer intended a club to do. They say a picture is worth a thousand words and that might be an understatement. What I want to do is show you what to look for if you are not equipped with all the latest measurement tools.
The first thing we need to do is explain the anatomy of a clubhead. Here is a look of an iron or a wedge from all different views followed by brief description of each part. This will provide the foundation for the remainder of the text. The circled numbers show the relative positions of the club are often referenced.
## Anatomy of a Golf Club Iron
!Golf club parts diagram of the face of an iron with each portion labeled!Golf club parts diagram of the face of an iron with each portion labeled
The sole of club (#3) is the part of the club that rests on the ground. On the modern iron there is a radius from heel to toe to allow the golf club to be hit from various lies off the ground.
The heel of the club (#2) is the juncture between the sole and the hosel (#4), or the part of the club the shaft is inserted into. The crotch of the neck (#6) is the juncture where the hosel and the top line (#5) meet.
The top line is the part of the head you see from address and will be angled with the part furthest from the crotch or called the toe (#1) is the highest. In many cases the top line on the #3 through #7 irons will look straight (there is a slight radius), while the #8 and 9 iron as well as the wedges will be more rounded. The rounding provides for a taller face height or face profile from which to hit the ball.
The toe height is the distance from the ground to the apex of the top line. The hosel length is the measurement from the top of the hosel to the heel where it intersects the ground line. The hosel length can vary from longer in wedges and clubheads designed for better players to shorter for game improvement models. We will see the significance once we show the center of gravity locations.
Blade length is the measurement from the heel where it intersects the ground line to the outermost portion of the toe. The blade length can vary as well and goes hand-in-hand with hosel length as one gets longer the other becomes shorter. The reason for this is we are working with fixed weights. A typical #6-iron is 263g and you can only stretch one measurement without increasing its weight.
The score line area is the place that is designed to first frame the ball at address. You will see that it does not extend the full length of the blade length or even the entire flat area of the face. The center of the scoreline area is the focal point and most golfers would get the notion that the center of this area is the optimum position to make impact with the ball. However, this is not always the case. The score lines are present to channel off any water or grass juices between the face and the ball to reduce the ball skidding up the face.
The toe show is the area out on the toe of the face of the club that is devoid of score lines or decorative sandblasting. By adjusting the distance of the toe show, this can have an impact on where you are to aim the club. When the toe show increases, it actually moves the center of the scoreline area closer to the hosel.
Looking at the sole view we can see both thetoe (#5) and hose l (#4) from a different perspective. There are two edges of the sole. The edge adjoining the face of the club is called the leading edge (#1), while the part at the rear edge of the club is called the trailing edge (#2). It is common to see that the sole is tapered from heel to toe with the toe being the widest. This helps to offset the heavy weight of the hosel. Therefore, the sole width or distance from the leading and trailing edges is generally measured from the center of the sole.
The area where the leading edge and the sole meet is called the neck (#3) of the club. It is not unusual to see a gooseneck appearance as this is what forms the offset of the head. We will be discussing offset in more depth later in this chapter.
!sole view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron!sole view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron
Our next view is from the toe. The reason to show this angle is to see that not only do we have radius from the heel of the club to the toe, but we have sole radius from the leading edge (#1) to the trailing edge (#2). This is what allows the ball to be hit cleanly from a variety of lies. This will come into play when we talk about bounce angles on irons and wedges.
You will also need to understand the leading edge of the hosel (#3) when we talk about the principles of offset.
!toe view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron!toe view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron
The next view shows the back of a typical modern cavity back iron. The hole in the center is an open cavity (#3). The shape will vary from iron to iron, but the basic principle is the same; to remove material from the center of the club and move it to the perimeter area - hence the term perimeter weighting. The area carved out the back of the iron is then displaced around the perimeter of the club or more specifically to the heel (#1) and toe (#2) regions of the lower portion of the sole. This is what creates greater stability for the club when impact is made other than directly in-line with the center of gravity of the head.
!cavity back view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron!cavity back view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron
There are two types of irons heads that do not possess an open cavity. One is the oldest form of iron construction, which is referred to as a muscle back or blade. Today, very few irons on the market are produced this way as they offer little in the way of game improvement. However, most wedges sold separately of iron sets will be a muscle back design. These will have narrow soles and a compact blade length.
The other type of non-cavity iron is the two-piece hollow-bodied construction. These clubs are often oversized and possess a bulbous shape and wide sole. These are some of the forerunners to today’s hybrid.
Cavity back irons may have more than one cavity or recessed area, but often that additional cavity may not be visible at first glance. The secondary cavity may be located behind the rear flange (#5) inside the cavity. This is called an undercut cavity (#4), and it is designed to remove additional material to be used elsewhere in the head. A cut-away view shows this in more detail. Expect an iron with an undercut cavity to be amongst the most forgiving designs.
The last view is from the top or address position. The gray shaded area represents the scoreline area, although the actual scorelines were intentionally omitted. Top line width (#1) has not been mentioned in any of the other diagrams. This has little to do with the function of the club as a personal preference if the golfer likes the look of a thicker top line for building confidence, a better player who prefers something thinner or in-between.
!topline view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron!topline view diagram of the anatomy of a golf club iron
## Iron and Wedge Loft
Each club in the set will have a specific loft or angle relative to the ground line. The reason for this is that it will produce a specific ball trajectory, spin and distance with the more lofted club hitting the ball initially higher and subsequently shorter.
Loft is one of the major reasons why there is a difference in distance between each club you hit in the bag.
!diagram of measuring loft of an iron!diagram of measuring loft of an iron
## Iron and Wedge Lie
The second most recognized iron or wedge specification is the lie angle. The published lie of an iron or wedges is obtained by placing the club in a fixture that holds the club so that the center of the sole touches the base or the score lines are parallel to the ground. The lie is the angle at which the shaft exits the head relative to the ground line.
The lie published by a manufacturer uses an industrial specification gauge to make sure the club is properly registered on the base. However, most clubmakers do not have access to one of these and will often use a lie/loft bending machine instead. This is perfectly fine if the scorelines are parallel by the manufacturer.
!diagram of measuring the lie of a golf iron!diagram of measuring the lie of a golf iron
## Iron Head Center of Gravity
Now that we have identified the various parts of an iron or wedge, the next discussion I want to tackle is the concept of center of gravity (CG). To find the center of gravity is a matter of balancing (sometimes very patiently) on a small object. Before the advent of CAD (Computer Aided Design) programs to tell you exactly where the CG was located, the old-fashioned way was to balance the head on a 1/8” wide pin punch. Here is an example of what it might look like in two different views.
A clubmaker can do this in their shop with the component head. Balancing the club on the face is not a problem on an iron because it is flat, but with the modern iron is produced with an ample amount of sole radius making it difficult to balance the head on a sharp object. Once the head is perfectly balanced, the head can be marked.
!diagram of balancing clubhead on a pin punch in two planes!diagram of balancing clubhead on a pin punch in two planes
The point at which you marked the head is not the CG. The center of gravity is the point where all the weight of the object can be considered to be concentrated. The CG can be anywhere along those dotted lines therefore we have to have at least two points of reference and the intersection of those lines is the actual CG location.
Take a close look at the next diagram of the same head but superimposed over one another to show you how the two planes that the club balanced at intersect to form the CG. If you look at the position where the pin punch rests against the face, it is higher than the actual CG. With any golf club, we have the loft to consider when measuring the balance point. Again, the CG location is along that line.
!diagram of the center of gravity of a golf club iron!diagram of the center of gravity of a golf club iron
The further rearward the club balances; the lower the center of the club becomes. We will see why this is important later. This diagram shows the CG locations in various views.
!center of gravity location of an iron in 3 different plane!center of gravity location of an iron in 3 different plane
## Iron Head Moment of Inertia
A golf club's center of gravity is no more than a mere spot. Therefore, it is very conceivable that two irons may possess the exact same center of gravity coordinates but play much differently. Most modern irons possess some sort of cavity as a means of re-distributing weight elsewhere in the head to enhance the performance in the form of perimeter weighting. Non-cavity back irons are called muscle back designs as all the mass forms a solid “muscle” behind the face. This next diagram shows both irons side by side.
There is a term called moment of inertia (MOI). It is resistance of twisting of an object and the higher the MOI, it is said that a golf club is more forgiving. By carving out material in the center of a club and spreading that weight toward the heel and toe, the clubhead will twist less on a shot hit other than directly in-line with its’ center of gravity.
!diagram of moment of inertia of a muscle versus cavity back iron!diagram of moment of inertia of a muscle versus cavity back iron
The reason this is important is that a golfer will experience some energy lost during a collision with the ball when struck off-center. Increased MOI will result in more distance and a more solid feeling at impact than a head equal in weight and size where the mass is more centrally located.
## Iron Offset, Onset and Face Progression
There are a few clubhead design parameters that directly affect the direction and trajectory one hits a golf ball. These terms are face progression, offset, and onset, which are either foreign to the average golfer or at least confusing at best. Let us help sort out these terms as they are all related to one another by first starting out by establishing a point of reference, which is the centerline axis of the shaft indicated by the dotted line.
### Iron face progression
Golf clubs are measured by foundries and golf club manufacturers using heavy duty industrial specification gauges. The base of a specs (for short) gauge has a series of lines engraved, one of which shows how the vertical centerline of the shaft translates to the horizontal plane as a means of referencing many things about a golf club.
One of these is face progression which is simply the measurement from the center line axis of the shaft (#1) to the leading edge of the club face (#2). The difference between the two lines is the face progression.
!diagram centerline axis of the shaft on a golf iron!diagram centerline axis of the shaft on a golf iron
!diagram between golf club iron face progression versus offset!diagram between golf club iron face progression versus offset
### Iron offset
A term that is commonly used to describe irons and wedges is offset. Offset is similar to face progression as the leading edge of the face (#2) is used as a reference point, but instead of the center line axis of the shaft being the second reference point, the forward most or leading edge of the hosel (#3) of the hosel is. The shaded areas show the amount of face progression verses offset using the same iron head example.
Nearly all irons on the market possess offset. This is considered a game improvement feature as we shall show later. Blade style wedges are probably one of the few examples where the offset is zero or where the leading edge of the hosel and the face coincide.
### Iron onset
The leading edge of the hosel of the iron is in front of the leading edge of the face, which is offset. If the opposite were to occur, as in rare instances, this would be called onset. Onset is a negative offset and in iron design may be called a face-forward design. We will talk about onset more when discussing woods and hybrids.
Manufacturers will vary in providing you with their offset measurements. In some cases, the units are in inches and others are in millimeters (mm). Inches are easily converted to millimeters by simply multiplying by 25.4 or to convert millimeters to inches, you divide by 25.4.
Some Japanese manufacturers have eliminated the use of offset altogether and simply gone to face progression in their listed specifications. Therefore, it is important to understand these differences. The reason is offset is unfortunately directly related to the outside diameter of the hosel, unlike face progression, which has one standard reference point. Not all irons will have the same outside hosel diameter due to the material they are made from and the diameters necessary to provide enough strength.
The modern irons made from grades of either stainless or carbon steel will typically have an outside diameter (OD) of 0.535” (13.59mm) with a plus or minus tolerance 0.005” (0.13mm). There are few iron heads made of zinc (found primarily in starter sets) may have a hosel OD closer to 0.560” (14.22mm). An identical head made from zinc will make the club appear as it has additional offset, even though the face progression would be the same as that same iron with a conventional hosel OD.
### Progressive Offset
Listed in the following table are typical amounts of offset in a game improvement and a player's iron set. We also converted to face progression (F.P. for short).
Let us first start by explaining offset with the game improvement set. In a normal set of irons, you might see the face progression starts with the leading edge of the face is rearward of the center line axis of the shaft and eventually moves forward. In this set, the #5 and 6 irons will have the leading edge appear almost directly in line with the shaft.
In an iron design for a more skilled golfer, the set is often designed with less offset as shown in the table on the right. Even there, you find that more offset is designed into the longer irons than the shorter ones.
Game Improvement Iron | Player's Iron
---|---
Iron | Offset | Offset | F.P. | F.P. | Iron | Offset | Offset | F.P. | F.P.
| mm | inches | mm | inches |  | mm | inches | mm | inches
#3 | 8 | 0.315 | -1.2 | -0.047 | #3 | 3.4 | 0.134 | 3.4 | 0.134
#4 | 7.5 | 0.295 | -0.7 | -0.028 | #4 | 3.3 | 0.130 | 3.5 | 0.138
#5 | 7 | 0.276 | -0.2 | -0.008 | #5 | 3.2 | 0.126 | 3.6 | 0.142
#6 | 6.5 | 0.256 | 0.3 | 0.012 | #6 | 3.0 | 0.118 | 3.8 | 0.150
#7 | 6 | 0.236 | 0.8 | 0.031 | #7 | 2.8 | 0.110 | 4.0 | 0.157
#8 | 5.5 | 0.217 | 1.3 | 0.051 | #8 | 2.6 | 0.102 | 4.2 | 0.165
#9 | 5 | 0.197 | 1.8 | 0.071 | #9 | 2.3 | 0.091 | 4.5 | 0.177
PW | 4.5 | 0.177 | 2.3 | 0.091 | PW | 2.2 | 0.087 | 4.6 | 0.181
SW | 4 | 0.157 | 2.8 | 0.110 | SW | 2.2 | 0.087 | 4.6 | 0.181
## Weight Distribution
While there are few standards in golf, surprisingly iron heads weight does not vary much from manufacturer to manufacturer. That is the modern #6-iron may weigh 263g plus or minus a few grams. The reason for this is that most steel-shafted irons are designed to be a specific length and swingweight so there is a formula in the head weight that will satisfy those conditions.
Therefore, it is important that if you make an iron longer or with a taller face height, or with a wider sole, material needs to be taken from somewhere else to maintain the acceptable head weight. That is why it is especially important to look closely at an iron as the weight distribution follows the geometry of the head.
### Traditional Iron
Let us start out with a muscle back iron to illustrate this point. Muscle back or blade irons were how clubs were made in the past. Their dimensions are what I will refer to as symmetrical. That is the blade length and hosel lengths are both approximately 3 inches (76mm) long.
You will notice two rectangles in this diagram. One is the outer perimeter of the toe, sole, hosel and top line. The other is the gray shaded area whose upper right-hand corner defines the CG position. With these two boxes affixed to one another, they can be stretched or squeezed to form the boundaries around the head. In most cases, the actual center of gravity of the head will overlap the upper right hand of the gray shades box because the CG is proportional to clubhead geometry.
Most golfers assume that the center of gravity of an iron is in the geometric center of gravity of the scoreline area or at least the horizontal direction from heel-to-toe. The long hosel of the traditional iron shifts the weight closer to the heel and higher up. The other issue is the vertical height of the center of gravity. Remember that a golf ball measures 1.68” in diameter in which the center of gravity is the mid-section of the ball is half that dimension or 0.84.”
!diagram of center of gravity of a traditional iron!diagram of center of gravity of a traditional iron
However, the CG of the golf ball is only part of the equation to creating a solid feel and proper trajectory. To understand the reasoning behind this statement, let us say we have a ball in 3/8” deep mowed fairway and the weight of the ball nestles down 1/8” so the ball effectively sits up 1/4” off of the ground.
Examine the difference in the CG of the ball and two irons of various vertical CGs. If the club had a high CG that measuring 0.815” (20.7mm) above the ground, this would higher than the club with a vertical center of gravity that measures 0.700” (17.8mm) above the ground line. The lower the club head’s CG is below the ball’s CG, the easier it is for the ball to become airborne.
!diagram of center of gravity of a golf ball versus an iron!diagram of center of gravity of a golf ball versus an iron
### Modern Iron
Over the years the hosel length has progressively become shorter and shorter, especially with irons designed for the higher handicap golfer. What this has done is shifted the weight not only closer to the center of the face, but also lower as well.
If you expand the blade length, sole width, or toe height 4mm as an example, that does not mean the center of gravity will move by the same amount. The CG will only move a certain percentage or a proportion of how much altered because you are working with a fixed amount of material and weight.
!diagram of the center of gravity of a modern cavity back iron!diagram of the center of gravity of a modern cavity back iron
### A Matter of Proportionality
If we make the toe height or face taller as depicted by the dotted line, then the CG will rise. However, the CG may only rise 37% the amount of the difference. If we elongate the toe and maintain the toe height, then the CG moves laterally further from the hosel, but approximately 41% of the difference. As you can see, it takes a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the head to shift the CG just a small amount.
!diagram comparing center of gravity of a tall face iron versus a iron with long blade length!diagram comparing center of gravity of a tall face iron versus a iron with long blade length
A high concentration of head weight is accounted for in the hosel and the face of the iron. The only exception is when a designer can add a secondary (or more) material whose density is different. This is why manufacturers will opt to use a maraging steel or titanium face plate or add tungsten in strategic areas of the club. This will start adding to the cost of the club as well. The advantage, if re-distributed correctly, can transform a game-improvement design into an ultra-game improvement design.
!diagram of weight distrubtion of a titanium face irons!diagram of weight distrubtion of a titanium face irons
To illustrate this, take a look at a titanium face iron. The gray shaded area represents the dimensions of the titanium face plate. This was an identical head (other than loft) to one we had designed wholly from stainless steel so we were able to see exactly what would happen when the lighter titanium replaced the heavier stainless steel. The titanium plate only weighed 31g, while that area originally weighed 56g or 22% of the total weight of a 5-iron. The weight saved was then added to the rear section of the sole and equally distributed to the heel and toe to provide a higher moment of inertia or designed to twist less on an off-center shot.
What was surprising is as much weight was able to be moved it had very little effect on the physical CG of the heads. An iron head is not very wide to begin with so even with 25g of weight is not going to alter the CG significantly (MOI change is greater). The result was the CG shifting 0.02” or 0.5mm lower and 0.03” or 0.75mm back. The heads were identical in their blade length, toe height and hosel length.
!diagram of center of gravity between all stainless iron versus titanium face iron!diagram of center of gravity between all stainless iron versus titanium face iron
### Sole Width
Unlike blade length, toe height and hosel length, sole width does not shift the center of gravity back as much as you see in advertising. In the diagram showing the center of gravity of a muscle back iron and a very wide sole cavity back iron, these two clubs are shown because they had a similar offset, toe height and even blade length.
!diagram of center of gravity between wide sole and narrow sole irons!diagram of center of gravity between wide sole and narrow sole irons
!super imposed diagram of center of gravities of a wide and narrow sole iron!super imposed diagram of center of gravities of a wide and narrow sole iron
The sole width is 1 inch greater on the club on the right and yet this only shifted the center of gravity rearward by 0.17” as you can see when the two clubs are super-imposed over one another. The explanation as why so minor change occurs makes sense once you see where most of the weight of the head exists. For example, the hosel and the face thickness are common in both heads.
Instead of the solid muscle behind the face, that amount of material is spread out very thin to form the wide sole and thin perimeter in the heel and toe regions. Again, the CG may not physically change significantly, but with the weight of the club being placed further from the center of gravity, it does yield a higher MOI.
### Rearward Center of Gravity
As we saw, a rearward shift in the CG can be attributed to a wider sole width, but there are also two more factors. One is loft. As the face is tilted back, this moves the CG moves along with it. In this diagram you can see a representation of a 5 iron (gray dotted line) superimposed over a 9 iron (black solid line). As a result, the CG is shifted back away from the center line axis of the shaft.
Note that the vertical height of the CG did not move up or down as the toe height had not changed to force a change. If there was a change in the toe or face height, then you could expect the CG to follow the geometry.
The second factor that can alter the rearward CG is the hosel position or offset. We showed earlier what offset is in an iron but did not address what function it had in clubhead design. Most irons have a progressive offset, but this was not always the case as they would have the same amount of offset throughout the set of irons.
!diagram of center of gravity of a 5-iron and 9-iron super imposed over one another!diagram of center of gravity of a 5-iron and 9-iron super imposed over one another
 iron. Remember the offset is the distance from the leading portion of the hosel to the leading edge of the face. We also show CG offset or how far the rear CG is away from the center line axis of the shaft.
This will become more apparent when we look at the moderate offset (4mm) iron in the middle. The darker shaded area illustrates the offset while the lighter shaded area represents the CG offset. The addition of offset (changing hosel position) directly influences the rear CG location.
Lastly, we show an iron with a heavy amount of offset. In this situation, the CG is offset the furthest from the center line axis of the shaft. This is important to understand. The actual CG in relationship to the leading edge is not much different in each case, but the CG in relationship to the center line axis of the shaft does. This has a considerable influence on how high you might hit the ball, the face angle at impact as well as on shaft selection.
## Gravity Angle
To show you why, we are going to introduce one term that is not widely seen and that is the Gravity Angle. You might have even noticed this phenomenon and did not realize the importance of it. If you lay an iron on a table with the head overhanging, you will see that the leading edge does not remain perpendicular to the table's edge. The head will want to naturally rotate to line up with the CG of the head as pictured in this diagram.
In this case, this iron has a gravity angle of @15 degree. If a club designer wants to change the gravity angle, there are several ways of doing so. This is where we are going to tie together some of the things we learned earlier in the chapter.
!diagram of measuring gravity angle on a golf iron!diagram of measuring gravity angle on a golf iron
The gravity angle changes throughout a set of irons as more loft shifts the CG further back from the center line axis of the shaft. It is not surprising to see the PW with a 5º greater gravity angle than the matching #5 iron in the set just from the loft alone. This is another reason we see progressive offset throughout the set.
We know that as the blade length increases, the CG of the head will follow. Let us take a look at 3 irons with the same offset. The iron with the compact blade length will have the center of gravity closest to the hosel. As we increase the blade length, the CG becomes further away.
!diagram of how gravity angle changes with the blade length of an iron!diagram of how gravity angle changes with the blade length of an iron
The importance of this directly affects the gravity angle. By moving the CG further away from the hosel, it will decrease the gravity angle. The less the gravity angle is, the harder it will be to close the face at impact.
If we increase the offset with, we increase the CG offset. This is one reason compact blade length irons have a reduced amount of offset and those irons which are longer from heel-to-toe generally have more offset throughout the set. An iron with a long blade length and reduced offset produces a club with an exceptionally low gravity angle and ends up as a fade biased combination. This is fine for those who made draw or hook the ball, but remember most golfers hit the ball with a push, fade, or slice.
Then why not have an iron with a compact blade length and ample offset as this would create a high gravity angle? The shorter blade length would reduce the effective hitting area and confidence level of the golfer hitting it. Subsequently the moment of inertia reduces as well making it less forgiving on off-center shots.
Offset is built into the design to normalize the gravity angle and make it easier to square the face upon impact.
## “Sweet Spot”
Speaking of forgiveness, you have all heard the term “sweet spot.” Well, a spot is just that - a tiny spot. The best place to hit the ball is perpendicular to the center of gravity of the clubhead, which is also referred to as the center of percussion. If you miss-hit this spot, then this will cause the head to rotate around its center of gravity and cause the ball to potentially go off-line. Plus, the further the impact from the center of percussion, the more energy is consumed resulting in diminished distance.
!diagram of distance loss on an iron head depending upon where the ball is hit!diagram of distance loss on an iron head depending upon where the ball is hit
Instead of a spot, I like to think of it as a “sweet area.” It is the area where maximum distance can still be obtained. A good goal is to have the cluster pattern of balls hit on the face approximately the size a quarter, while the touring pros might be able to contain that impact area to a dime. On an iron, the center of gravity is roughly located near the 5th score line and may be in the center of the scoreline area or slightly biased toward the heel as a result of an elongated hosel.
## Sole Radius
One of the biggest clubmaking design changes occurred in the early 1990's when front-to-back sole radius was introduced to irons allowing the ball to be hit cleanly from a variety of lies. Before this, the sole in the front-to-back plane was flat.
In Chapter 6, we explained the difference between angle of attack and approach. This is often a byproduct of the ball position in the stance. Not only that, but we are also not hitting off flat even terrain every time. So, it is important we have some relief otherwise the leading or trailing edges of the club will dig into the ground causing a decrease in the distance and/or feel at impact.
If the player hits the ball on the upswing, the sole will make an impact closer to the trailing edge. With the radius, this allows the club to glide through rather than catch a sharp edge. If the player hits down with a descending angle of attack, the impact with the sole on the ground will be toward the leading edge. Again, with the sole radius, this provides some relief, so it doesn't dig into the turf the same as if it were a sharp edge.
If the club is level at the bottom of the swing arc, then the sole impact will be in the center of the sole. Or will it be? This leads us into the next clubhead parameter called bounce.
!diagram of imapct point on sole when hitting on the upswing, downswing and level!diagram of imapct point on sole when hitting on the upswing, downswing and level
## Bounce Angle
Bounce angle is a term associated with wedges, but any club can have a bounce angle. Besides the golf shaft torque, bounce angle may be the next most misunderstood concept of a golf club design. Part of this lies in its definition. I have seen many places where the writer defines bounce as:
_(Old definition) The measurement of the number of degrees from where the club rests on the ground and the club’s leading edge._
While the definition above may have been true in the past, it is technically not correct anymore. Before I explain why, let us lead you gradually in this discussion by examining the anatomy of the sole. First, there are four factors that go together in understanding this design parameter of a golf club; sole radius (if at all), sole width, leading edge height and contact point on the sole.
Looking back at the anatomy of the sole, there are a couple important terms to remember. The outermost dimensions of the sole are the leading edge (positioned at the bottom of the face) and the trailing edge (positioned along the back edge of the head). The distance between the leading and trailing edges is the sole width. Note that the trailing edge of the sole may be tapered, so the sole width may vary along its’ length. Most manufacturers will reference the center point of the sole for this dimension. It is also important to realize that few irons are perfectly flat on the sole although it may look that way. In addition, head manufacturers will normally grind or radius the leading or trailing edge so that it is not a sharp point.
!diagram leading and trailing edges on a flat sole iron!diagram leading and trailing edges on a flat sole iron
The next term to mention is the contact point or where the sole contacts the ground line when the hosel or shaft is perpendicular to the ground. In the diagram labeled Pre-Radius Sole (< 2000), the contact point is in the center of the sole meaning that both the leading and trailing edges of the sole are parallel to the ground. If the sole were perfectly flat, then the contact point would be the entire sole width.
What happens when the contact point is not in the center of the sole? To start out the understanding of bounce let us use our example where the sole is perfectly flat, contact on the sole is not in the center and yet the hosel is perpendicular to the ground. In this case, there are only two positions that the sole can rest on: the leading and trailing edge of the sole.
If the contact point is on the trailing edge, then the leading edge with rest above the ground line again forming a sole angle relative to the ground line. The bounce angle with a 0.75” wide sole with the leading edge measuring 0.052” above the ground line creates a 4° sole angle pointed upward from the ground. When this condition occurs, it is referred to as a positive bounce angle.
Conversely, if the contact point is on the leading edge, then the trailing edge with rest above the ground line. The sole angle relative to the ground line forms the bounce angle. In our example, a 0.75” wide sole has a trailing edge measuring 0.052” above the ground line, which creates a 4° sole angle pointed toward the ground. When this condition occurs, it is referred to as a negative bounce angle or also referred to as a “digger” sole. A digger sole does just that as it tends to dig into the ground, which would be considered a negative design characteristic for any club designed to be hit off of the ground.
!diagram of a golf iron with a digger sole!diagram of a golf iron with a digger sole
Why would a manufacturer design a golf club with bounce in the first place? It is important to understand at impact that the club may not return with the hosel perpendicular to the ball or that the golfer starts out with the club positioned as the manufacturer measures the loft of the club, but with a forward press. Whenever the ball is positioned on the ground, it may be necessary for the golfer to hit “down” on the ball to make solid contact and achieve getting the ball airborne and with increased back spin.
To account for the downward angle of attack, manufacturers needed to create some bounce into their designs to avoid the club from burying into the ground conditions.
!diagram of the contact point of two irons, one with positive and one with negative bounce!diagram of the contact point of two irons, one with positive and one with negative bounce
Here is an example of the same flat-soled iron with a 4° bounce angle with the shaft parallel to the ground and next to it, the same club at impact with a 4° angle of attack. By creating the bounce leaving the leading edge above the ground at address, avoided the club from digging into the ground at impact. As the angle of attack matched the bounce angle, the contact point of the sole on the ground is in the center of the sole. If the angle of attack had been any less than 4°, then the trailing edge would have contacted the ground, thus the ball would make contact on the face closer to the leading edge of the face. However, if the golfer struck the ball with an angle of attack greater than 4°, then the leading edge would have contacted the ground first.
Luckily, manufacturers have done away with flat soles as the margin for error is too small. The modern iron looks more like the following diagram and as you can see has a sole radius from front to back with no well-defined trailing and leading edges to reference. Sole radius accounts for variable angles of attack with minimal contact of the sole on the ground
Producing a radius on the sole, the clubs could conceivably contact the ground line at several different positions not possible with a flat sole.
Examine the next diagram regarding the sole radius and the contact point. With a radius soled club, contact made with the center of the sole touching created no bounce as the leading and trailing edges would be level with one another. Therefore, on a radius soled club, a 0° bounce occurs when the contact point is made in the center of the sole when the shaft or hosel is perpendicular to the ground.
!diagram of the sole radius of a modern golf iron!diagram of the sole radius of a modern golf iron
Examine the next diagram regarding the sole radius and the contact point. With a radius soled club, contact made with the center of the sole touching created no bounce as the leading and trailing edges would be level with one another. Therefore, on a radius soled club, a 0° bounce occurs when the contact point is made in the center of the sole when the shaft or hosel is perpendicular to the ground.
A positive bounce angle occurs when the leading edge is higher than the trailing edge. For this to occur with the shaft perpendicular to the ground, then the sole contact must be made rearward from the center of the sole. A negative sole angle occurs when the trailing edge is higher than the leading edge. Again, with the shaft perpendicular to the ground, the contact point on the must be forward of the center of the sole.
!contact point on the sole a modern iron in the center, leading and trailing edges!contact point on the sole a modern iron in the center, leading and trailing edges
However, this is the very reason the original definition does not apply anymore. For example, the contact point could be in the very center of the sole. By the old definition, it was the angle created by the contact point and leading edge. When the sole was flat, this was true, but not with a radius sole. Look at the following diagram to see the reason. As mentioned before, if the contact point is in the center of the sole on a club with a radius, then there is 0° bounce therefore this drawing does not accurately depict what sole bounce really is.
!diagram of not an accurate depiction of bounce on a golf club iron!diagram of not an accurate depiction of bounce on a golf club iron
_(Correct definition) The measurement of the number of degrees between the club head’s leading and trailing edges in relationship to the ground line when the club is in the square position and with the hosel perpendicular to the ground._
This leads us to the next part of the discussion to understand how bounce is made / measured on a club with a radius sole. To produce a radius, there first needs to be a circle. For example, let us say the circle in the next diagram has a diameter of 4” so the radius of the circle is half of that or 2”. The radius of the sole can only be as wide as the sole itself. Scaling to the diagram, the sole radius will be 1.25” (as indicated by the solid gray segment), which is extremely wide, but selected to better illustrate the basic idea.
Look at the two pie-shaped segments within the circle. At the base, each is one-half the width of the sole. Where they connect would be the contact point on the ground line which would be in the center of sole.
!diagram of a 4" circle and 2" radius, sole with, trailing and leading edges!diagram of a 4" circle and 2" radius, sole with, trailing and leading edges
Due to the radius of the arc, only one point along the circle can contact our ground line, therefore the outermost positions of the pie shaped pieces along the circumference of the circle will be higher than the ground line. These are labeled “leading edge” and “trailing edge” which are parallel to the ground line. Using our example with a 2” radius and a 1.25” wide sole width, the leading edge will be 0.1” above the ground line, yet the bounce is 0°.
A flat soled club with a 1.25” wide sole and 0° bounce, the leading and trailing edges would be on the ground. It is important to understand the effect of sole width on the distance from the leading edge to the ground line. There is a faint dotted line above and parallel to the solid gray segment. If the sole width was 2”, then the leading trailing edges would be 0.268” above the ground. Contrarily, the narrower the sole width, the leading edge would not be as high given the same sole radius. The importance of this statement will come later.
Now that we have established the sole radius and sole width, the next thing is to select the degrees of bounce to create the leading-edge height and contact point on the sole. To help understand this part, let us take the two pie-shaped pieces and the solid gray segment out of the circle. In the diagram it looks like we now have four tiny ships. The one on the furthest left is our original model from the diagram above.
!diagram of effective bounce on an iron with a 1.25" sole width and 2" sole radius!diagram of effective bounce on an iron with a 1.25" sole width and 2" sole radius
The second model is the same segment of the circle but rotated 4° counter-clockwise from the center of the circle so that the leading edge is higher than the trailing edge. The dimension to the right of each segment is the dimension from the leading edge to the ground line. If this were a right-handed club viewed from the toe, this would be considered positive bounce because the contact point is now located rearward of the center of the sole. Again, it is not the contact point that determines the bounce it is the difference between leading and trailing edges in relationship to the ground line.
The third model in the diagram shows when the segment of the circle is rotated 4° clockwise from the center of the circle so that trailing edge is higher than the leading edge. This creates a negative sole angle, but due to the radius, the leading edge remains above the ground line (0.052”). The last model represents what happens more on a sand wedge where the bounce is much higher than typically the rest of the set (in this case 12°). The contact point is much closer to the trailing edge, which also raises the leading edge higher off the ground. A situation where the leading edge is too high can lead to shots that can be bladed or skulled in certain situations.
As mentioned earlier, the narrower the sole, the less height the leading edge is above the ground line. By narrowing the sole from 1.25” to 0.781” (closer to a normal sole width), the leading-edge lowers with the same 2” sole radius.
!diagram of effective bounce on an iron with a 0.781" sole width and 2" sole radius!diagram of effective bounce on an iron with a 0.781" sole width and 2" sole radius
We are going to use the same scenarios as above so you can see what happens when sole width is changed. The model on the far right illustrates just how bounce itself does not tell the whole story. There is a term called effective bounce, which is the bounce measurement, along with the leading-edge height and sole width. Even though the fourth model in the two diagrams have 12° bounce, the leading-edge height is a little over 0.10” difference. While this may not seem that great, it can make a significant difference in the playability from a tight lie versus a fluffy lie, with the former being better for tighter lies or firmer terrain.
 is if the radius was small (0.625” radius) and the width was extremely narrow (0.5” wide). Even if the club had 30° bounce, the leading edge would only be 0.25” above the ground line!
### Progressive Bounce
You might even see long irons with negative bounce as part of their specifications. Once considered that the head was inaccurately manufactured if the bounce was negative is no longer true. Often the #2 and even 3-irons are used off a tee. Thus, any time the ball is off the ground, then an upward or ascending angle of attack occurs which will add both loft and bounce to the club at impact. Even if clubs with negative bounce are hit off the ground with a level swing, the modern sole radius will prevent the chance of a “fat” shot as the leading edge will be above the ground line.
Most manufacturers do not provide bounce specifications other than for the wedges, for good reason as it can be quite confusing to the customer. Even if they did, sole radius and sole width specifications will not be included. So, it is up to the manufacturer to understand these relationships when designing a particular model to make it playable.
Very few times you see the exact same head, but in different bounce option from a fitting situation. The only time multiple bounce options are available occurs with only a few name brand manufacturers who will sell enough to make it a worthwhile investment in tooling. The two leaders in the wedge category (Cleveland and Titleist) offer high bounce and even low bounce options for the different conditions and the golfer’s angle of attack. Otherwise, it will require a skilled clubmaker to grind the sole or alter the loft to customize the effective bounce. Additional information can be found on bounce in the Wedge chapter.
## Iron Head Center of Gravity and Shaft Interaction
The CG location of a head can influence the type of shaft that might be selected. After all those two items (along with the grip) function as a system and do not work independently of one another. If you have been playing golf for a while and played a variety of heads and shafts, you may have experienced that certain heads and shafts seem to go together better, like peanut butter and jelly. Then you go to re-shaft an iron you have been playing with an entirely different type of shaft of the same flex and then all of the sudden they go together like oil and molasses.
!diagram of center of gravity offset between a player's iron and game improvement iron!diagram of center of gravity offset between a player's iron and game improvement iron
Let us review the CG locations between player’s irons versus that of a game-improvement iron. We found out earlier the blade length is shorter on a player’s iron and subsequently the CG will offset less from the centerline axis of the shaft than a game improvement iron with a longer blade length. A CG location located further from the center line axis of the shaft will result in a more open face upon impact will all else being equally. To understand this principle, use a figure skater as an example.
If a figure skater pulls their arm in closer to their body that can allow them to spin around faster than if they stuck their arms out. It sounds as if we are talking about the moment of inertia, which would be correct. But in this case with an iron (or wedge) this becomes the moment of inertia around the shaft. The more CG offset from the centerline axis of the shaft; the greater amount of torque is required to allow the clubhead to rotate closed prior to impact.
In addition, we need to look at the CG offset in the rearward position as well. The shaft will want to try to align itself with the center of gravity by bowing forward. The greater the CG offset (such as an increased amount of offset), the greater amount of flex is required to allow the shaft to bow.
Look at what type of shafts are paired with the different heads on the market. For example, True Temper’s Dynamic Gold is a staple that has remained popular for many years now and is found exclusively in player’s irons or blade-style wedges. Shafts for game improvement irons tend to be lighter shafts that are more flexible (both overall and in the tip section) and are higher torque shafts especially when you factor in graphite shafts. While we have not covered shafts yet, this should prepare you for some of the cause-and-effect relationships ahead.
!diagram of forces acting on a golf shaft at impact!diagram of forces acting on a golf shaft at impact
Continue to Chapter Eight
